.TH DOTFILES 1 "2026-06-05" "dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
dotfiles \- unified desktop and dotfiles helper
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dotfiles
\fIcommand\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
.br
.B dotfiles help
[\fIcommand\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dotfiles
is the single command entry point on PATH for this dotfiles desktop setup. It
applies managed dotfiles, launches the Walker menu, opens apps, manages
generated TUI and web app desktop entries, restarts services, changes runtime
defaults, and dispatches status/control helpers used by Hyprland and Waybar.
.SH CORE COMMANDS
.TP
.B dotfiles help [command]
Show command help.
.TP
.B dotfiles apps
List managed app/config names discovered from the chezmoi source tree.
.TP
.B dotfiles diff [app]
Preview all managed dotfile changes, or only the named app/config.
.TP
.B dotfiles apply [app]
Apply all managed dotfile changes, or only the named app/config.
.TP
.B dotfiles rebuild
Switch the NixOS configuration using the managed flake.
.TP
.B dotfiles menu [section]
Open the Walker-backed dotfiles menu. Supported sections include
.BR apps ,
.BR keybindings ,
.BR learn ,
.BR trigger ,
.BR style ,
.BR setup ,
.BR tui ,
.BR webapps ,
.BR install ,
.BR remove ,
.BR update ,
.BR about ,
.BR system ,
and
.BR defaults .
.TP
.B dotfiles restart service
Restart a supported service. Supported services include
.BR alacritty ,
.BR btop ,
.BR foot ,
.BR hypr ,
.BR hypridle ,
.BR hyprland ,
.BR hyprsunset ,
.BR kitty ,
.BR mako ,
.BR swayosd ,
.BR terminal ,
.BR tmux ,
.BR walker ,
and
.BR waybar .
.TP
.B dotfiles reset ratune
Remove Ratune's Linux keyutils Subsonic password key so Ratune prompts for the
password again on the next launch.
.TP
.B dotfiles screensaver [force|run]
Launch the terminal screensaver. The
.B run
mode is used internally inside the screensaver terminal window.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-app desktop-id|command [args...]
Open a desktop entry or execute a command under the desktop session.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-or-focus pattern [command...]
Focus an existing Hyprland window matching the class/title pattern, or launch
the supplied command.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-tui command [args...]
Open a terminal UI command in the configured terminal launcher.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-or-focus-tui command [args...]
Focus a terminal UI window by its dotfiles app id or open it.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-web-app name url
Open a browser app window for a URL.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-or-focus-web-app name url
Focus an existing browser app window by name or open it.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-or-focus-browser [url...]
Focus the stable main browser window or open the configured browser with a
stable window name.
.TP
.B dotfiles create-web-app [name url [icon]]
Create a managed desktop entry under
.IR ~/.local/share/applications .
Without arguments, prompts through Walker.
.TP
.B dotfiles create-tui-app [name command [icon]]
Create a managed terminal UI desktop entry under
.IR ~/.local/share/applications .
Without arguments, prompts through Walker.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-browser [--private] [url...]
Open the configured browser, optionally in private mode.
.TP
.B dotfiles edit [file...]
Open files with the configured editor. The default is the TUI editor
.BR nvim .
.TP
.B dotfiles set browser|terminal|editor value
Change runtime defaults.
.TP
.B dotfiles shell-auto-complete --zsh
Print shell completion code to stdout.
.SH DESKTOP COMMANDS
.TP
.B dotfiles capture screenshot|screenrecording
Capture screenshots or toggle screen recording.
.TP
.B dotfiles toggle waybar|idle|nightlight|notifications|touchpad
Toggle desktop features.
.TP
.B dotfiles status [app]|battery|updates|voxtype
Show chezmoi status for managed dotfiles, or print desktop status values for
notifications and Waybar.
.TP
.B dotfiles control wifi|bluetooth|audio
Open TUI control panels.
.TP
.B dotfiles system lock|wake|update|timezone|power-menu
Run system actions used by Hyprland and Waybar.
.TP
.B dotfiles window close-all|pop
Run window-management helpers.
.TP
.B dotfiles workspace layout-toggle|monitor-scaling-cycle
Run workspace helpers.
.TP
.B dotfiles brightness display|keyboard ...
Adjust display or keyboard brightness.
.TP
.B dotfiles audio input-mute|output-switch
Toggle microphone mute or switch audio output.
.TP
.B dotfiles osd [swayosd-client args...]
Proxy to swayosd-client on the focused monitor.
.TP
.B dotfiles walker [--sock] [walker args...]
Launch Walker with dotfiles defaults. With no Walker arguments, dotfiles tries
the Walker socket first when available.
.TP
.B dotfiles input prompt [walker args...]
Prompt for a single input value through Walker.
.TP
.B dotfiles open-floating-terminal command [args...]
Open a floating terminal command.
.SH DEFAULTS
.TP
.B dotfiles set browser value
Writes the browser desktop id to
.I ~/.config/dotfiles/defaults.env
and applies XDG browser defaults when xdg-settings or xdg-mime are available.
.TP
.B dotfiles set terminal value
Writes
.I ~/.config/xdg-terminals.list
for xdg-terminal-exec.
.TP
.B dotfiles set editor value
Writes EDITOR and VISUAL to
.IR ~/.config/dotfiles/defaults.env .
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
dotfiles menu
dotfiles menu defaults
dotfiles apps
dotfiles diff walker
dotfiles apply walker
dotfiles rebuild
dotfiles status walker
dotfiles restart waybar
dotfiles reset ratune
dotfiles open-browser --private
dotfiles edit ~/.config/hypr/bindings.conf
dotfiles set editor nvim
dotfiles set terminal Alacritty.desktop
dotfiles shell-auto-complete --zsh
dotfiles create-web-app ChatGPT https://chatgpt.com web-browser
dotfiles create-tui-app Btop btop utilities-system-monitor
.EE
.SH COMPLETION
.B dotfiles
can generate shell completion code.
.PP
For Zsh:
.EX
source <(dotfiles shell-auto-complete --zsh)
.EE
.PP
The managed Zsh config sources completion automatically when
.B dotfiles
is available on PATH. Managed app completion is discovered dynamically from the
source tree, so
.B dotfiles apply wal<Tab>
can complete to
.BR "dotfiles apply walker" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/dotfiles/defaults.env
Runtime defaults written by
.BR "dotfiles set" .
.TP
.I ~/.config/dotfiles/source.env
Managed source directory used by dynamic CLI completion.
.TP
.I ~/.config/dotfiles/scripts
Internal
.B dotfiles-*
desktop helper scripts dispatched by
.BR dotfiles .
This directory is not added to PATH.
.TP
.I ~/.config/xdg-terminals.list
Terminal preference order for xdg-terminal-exec.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/applications/dotfiles-*.desktop
Generated or managed web app and TUI app launchers.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR walker (1),
.BR xdg-terminal-exec (1),
.BR xdg-settings (1),
.BR hyprctl (1)
